=Tutorial : Using devices=
==Programmable Heater with TMP102 and MCP23017=)</font> Tutorial : Using devices=
WebIOPi include several drivers to directly control over s30 electronic devices. It provide a consistent and common abstraction for most used sensors, analog converters, and GPIO expanders. See the [DEVICES supported devices] pages for a complete listing.

All supported devices can be used in your Python script, from the REST API, the Javascript library, or evethe [PYTHONCLIENT Python] Python or [JAVACLIENT Java] Client. Function provided depend on the devices type. Devices can support one or multiples interfaces. Interfaces are grouped in 3 packages :

  * (I/O Expanders) [DIGITAL Digital]
    * GPIOPort
  * [ANALOG Analog]
    * ADC (Analog to Digital Converter, ie. analog inputs)
    * DAC (Digital to Analog Converter, ie. analog outputs)
    * PWM (Pulse Width Modulation outputs)
  * [SENSOR Sensor]
    * Temperature
    * Pressure
    * Luminosity
    * Distance

==Testing Devices==
Before using devices in your Pythons script or custom UI, you may need to debug your circuitry and at least, verify it works well with the WebIOPi environment. You don't need to write any line of code to test your devices, thanks to the WebIOPi configuration file.

Edit */etc/webTMPXXX TMP102] I2C TemperatBMP085] I2C Temperature and Pressure sensor, simply add following line in the *`[DEVICES]`* sectitmp*. This name will be used to identify the sensor in the whole system. I say a TMP102, but it can be any Temperature sensor supported by WebIOPi. Except from the config syntax, they all have the same functions.
{{{
[DEVICES]
tmp = TMP102
}}}

Assume we also have a [MCP230xx MCP23017] I2C GPIO Expander, then we can also add the optional I2C slave address. Again, I say a MCP23017, but it can be any GPIO expander supported. Just adapt the config line to your chipset, the rest of the tutorial remains unchanged.
{{{
[DEVICES]
tmp = TMP102
mcp = MCP23017ES]
bmp = BMP085
gpio0 = MCP23008 slave:0x20
}}}

Ensure you don't have any *doc-root* directive in the *`[HTTP]`* section to use defaults web apps, save, and restart webiopi to use the device monitor (http://raspberr<p align="center">http://trouch.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/webiopi-tutorials-device-testoads/2013/03Devices in Python scripts with REST mapping=Python scripts : Heater example ==
When devices are named in the configuration file, drivers are automaticall and mapped to the REST APIy called to initialize the device. We need to use the *webiopi.deviceInstance(name)* function in the Python script to retrieve the device object instance for the given name. Then we can use functions of the drivers, depending of interfaces supported. You will find a link to all interfaces supported with a complete function list on the topTMP102ch device wiki pages. See [BMP0
The following example automatically turns on/off the heater, plugged on a GPIO expander, depending on the temperature given by a the sensorP There is also a main *AUTO* flag to allow forcing the heater.
{{{
import webiopi
GPIO = webiopi.GPIO # Helper for LOW/HIGH values
HEATER = 7 # Heater plugged on the Expander Pin 7
MIN = 22 # Minimum temperature in celsius
MAX = 24 # Maximum temperature in celsius
AUTO = True ## setup function is automatically called at WebIOPi startup# Maximum temperatmcp = webiopi.deviceInstance("mcp") # retrieve the device named "mcp" in the configuration 
    mcp.setFunction(HEATER, GPIO.OUT)

# loop function is repeatedly called by WebIOPi 
def loop():
    if (AUTO):
        tmp = webiopi.deviceInstance("tmp") # retrieve the device named "tmp" in the configuration
        mcp = webiopi.deviceInstance("mcp") # retrieve the device named "mcp" in the configuration 

        celsius = tmp.getCelsius() # retrieve current temperature
        print("Temperature: %f" % celsius)

        # Turn ON heater when passing below the minimum temperature
        if (celsius < MIN):
            mcp.digitalWrite(HEATER, GPIO.HIGH)

        # Turn OFF heater when reaching maximum temperature
        if (celsius >= MAX):
            mcp.digitalWrite(HEATER, GPIO.LOW)

    # gives CPU some time before looping again
    webiopi.sleep(1)

# destroy function is called at WebIOPi shutdown
def destroy():med "mcp = webiopi.deviceInstance("mcp") # retrieve the device named "mcp" in the configuration 
    mcp" in the configuration 
    gpio0.digitalWrite(HEATER, GPIO.LOW) 
# a simple macro to return heater mode
@webiopi.macro
def getMode():
    if (AUTO):
        return "auto"
    return "manual"

# simple macro to set and return heater mode
@webiopi.macro
def setMode(mode):
    global AUTO
    if (mode == "auto"):
        AUTO = True
    elif (mode == "manual"):
        AUTO = False
    return getMode() # turn Javascript Library==
If you set the device in the configuration file, all functions from the driverrary==
All functions from drivers are bound to the REST API. Most of them are also available directly in the Javascript library. Simply pass the configured name for the devic
First, edit your index.html file to write your HTML structure. Don't forget to add a `<script>` tag to include */webiopi.js*, the `<body>` contains twos `<button>`. The first button will be used to change the heater mode (auto/manual). The second button will display the temperature and controls the heater. There is also few CSS rules to setup buttons and define two CSS classes.
{{{
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/html4/loose.dtd">
<html>
<head>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8">
    <title>WebIOPi | Light Control</title>
    <script type="text/javascript" src="/webiopi.js"></script>

        <style type="text/css">
                button {
                        display: block;
                        margin: 5px 5px 5px 5px;
                        width: 160px;
                        height: 45px;
                        font-size: 24pt;
                        font-weight: bold;
                        color: white;
                }
                
                button.OFF {
                        background-color: Black;
                }
                
                button.ON {
                        background-color: Red;
                }
        </style>
</head>
<body>
    <div align="center">
	<button id="bt_mode" onclick="toggleMode()"/><br>
        <button id="bt_heater" onclick="toggleHeater()"/>
    </div>
</body>
</html>
}}}

We can then add an important Javascript part to glue the buttons to the WebIOPi REST API.
{{{
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/html4/loose.dtd">
<html>
<head>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8">
    <title>WebIOPi | Heater Control</title>
    <script type="text/javascript" src="/webiopi.js"></script>

    <script type="text/javascript">
	// declare few global variables
	var tmp;
	var mcp;
	var heater = 7;

        webiopi().ready(init);
	
	// defines function passed later to webiopi().ready()
	function init() {
		// setup helpers to remotely control devices
		tmp = new Temperature("tmp");
		mcp = new GPIOPort("mcp");
		// automatically refresh UI each seconds
		setInterval(updateUI, 1000);
	}

	// function called through setInterval
	function updateUI() {
		// call Temperature.getCelsius REST API
		// result is asynchronously displayed using the callback
		tmp.getCelsius(temperatureCallback);
		
		// call MCP.digitalRead REST API
		if (mcp.isReady()) {
			mcp.digitalRead(heater, gpioPortDigitalCallback);
		}
		
		// call getMode macro
		webiopi().callMacro("getMode", [], modeCallback);
	}	

	// callback function used to display the temperature
	function temperatureCallback(sensorName, data) {
		// jQuery functions
		$("#bt_heater").text(data + "°C");
	}
	
	// callback function used to display MCP digital state
	function gpioPortDigitalCallback(gpioName, channel, value) {
		// test returned value and set appropriate CSS class on the button
		if (value == "0") {
			// jQuery functions
			$("#bt_heater").attr("class", "OFF");
		}
		else if (value == "1") {
			$("#bt_heater").attr("class", "ON");
		}
	}

	// callback function used to display current heater mode
	function modeCallback(macroName, args, data) {
		$("#bt_mode").text(data);
	}

	// called by the heater button
	function toggleHeater() {
		if ($("#bt_heater").attr("class") == "OFF") {
			mcp.digitalWrite(heater, 1, gpioPortDigitalCallback);
		}
		else if ($("#bt_heater").attr("class") == "ON") {
			mcp.digitalWrite(heater, 0, gpioPortDigitalCallback);
		}
	}

	// called by the mode button
	function toggleMode() {
		if ($("#bt_mode").text() == "auto") {
			webiopi().callMacro("setMode", "manual", modeCallback);
		}
		else if ($("#bt_mode").text() == "manual") {
			webiopi().callMacro("setMode", "auto", modeCallback);
		}
	}
   </script>
}}}

Don't forget to define your script and change the doc-root setting in /etc/webiopi/config then start webiopi foreground. This example provide fixed temperature min/max, but you can mix this tutorial with the [Tutorial_Macros macro tutorial] to add few more controls.

http://trouch.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/webiopi-tutorials-heater.pngurn Devices in Python scripts without REST mappinged Python script==
If you don't need or don't want your devices to be bound to the REST API, you can avoid setting them in the configuration file and initialize the driver by yourself. You will just need to import the driver from the correct package. You can also use the whole library in your own Python script, without the WebIOPi HTTP server.

For insTMP102 and MCP23017 :
{{{
import webiopi

# load drivers
from webiopi.devices.sensor import TMP102
from webiopi.devices.digital import MCP23017
 for instance.
{{{
import webiopi
GPIO = webiopi.GPIO # Helper for LOW/HIGH values
HEATER = 0 # Heater plugged on the Expander Pin 0
MIN = 20 # Minimum temperature in celsius
MAX = 22 ## initialize drivers
tmp = TMP102()
mcp = MCP23017(slave=0x20)

# setup function is automatically called at WebIOPi startup
def setup():
    mcp.setFunction(HEATER, GPIO.OUT)

# loop function is repeatedly called by WebIOPi 
def loop():med "gpio0" in the configuration 
    celsius = bmp.getCelsius() # retrieve current temperature

    # Turn ON heater when passing below ths minimum temperaturemcpif (celcius < MIN):
        gpio0.diggitalWrite(HEATER, GPIO.HIGH)

   # Turn OFF heater when reachinsius >= MAX):
        mcp.digitalWrite(HEATER, GPIO.LOW)

    # gives CPU some time before looping again
    webiopi.sleep(1)

# destroy function is called at WebIOPi shutdown
def destroy():med "mcp" in the configuration 
    gpio0.digitalWrite(HEATER, GPIO.LOW) # t